Add guide post - How to use custom Java distribution on Gitpod (#2957)
gitpod-io/website: src/routes/guides/custom-java-distribution-on-gitpod/index.md

---
author: maciej
date: Thursday, 27 Oct 2022 02:00:00 UTC
excerpt: Gitpod workspace image (the image on which your environment runs) comes with preinstalled Java development tools like SDKMan,and Gradle. There are at least two ways how you can to configure Java version for each new Gitpod workspace.
slug: custom-java-distribution-on-gitpod
teaserImage: teaser.jpg
image: header.jpg
title: How to use custom Java distribution on Gitpod
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

> [Gitpod(https://www.gitpod.io/) workspace image (the image on which your environment runs) comes with preinstalled Java development tools like [SDKMan](https://sdkman.io/), https://maven.apache.org/ and [Gradle](https://gradle.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default Gitpod [`workspace-full`](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/workspace-image) image comes with preinstalled Java development tools like [SDKMan](https://sdkman.io/), https://maven.apache.org/ and [Gradle](https://gradle.org/).

When you execute `java --version` in the terminal, you'll find out that the current Java version is Java 11 (at the time of writing this blog post).

Since [SDKMan](https://sdkman.io/) is installed, you can easily switch to a different Java version with:

`$ sdk install java 17.0.4.1-tem`

But this change will be reflected only in your current workspace. If someone else opens Gitpod workspace for the same Gitpod repository or if you recreate workspace, Java will be back to 11 and the version you installed with SDKMan will be gone.

> There are at least two ways how tou can to configure Java version for each new Gitpod workspace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are at least two ways you can to configure Java version for each new Gitpod workspace.
```

## Set Java version with .gitpod.yml

> Gitpod workspace can be configured with `.gitpod.yml`. There we set the commands that are executed when workspace is created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gitpod workspaces can be configured with [`.gitpod.yml`](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/introduction/learn-gitpod/gitpod-yaml). We can specify [startup task(s)](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/tasks) that will execute shell commands for us:
```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\`\`\`yaml
```

tasks:
  - before: sdk install java 17.0.4.1-tem
```

This is almost good. The problem is that `sdk install` prompts user to set the installed version as a default. There's no flag to run the command in non-interactive mode, but there is a [hacky workaround](https://github.com/sdkman/sdkman-cli/issues/101#issuecomment-155938383):

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\`\`\`yaml
```

```
FROM gitpod/workspace-full:2022-10-25-06-57-58

SHELL ["/bin/bash", "-c"]
RUN source "/home/gitpod/.sdkman/bin/sdkman-init.sh"  \
    && sdk install java 17.0.4.1-tem < /dev/null
```

Let's break it down:

1. It is recommended to use a specific Docker image tag for a base image. Go to https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/workspace-full and look for the latest tag, then use it in FROM command in the Dockerfile.
2. Change shell to bash, source SDKMan init so that `sdk` command becomes available, and run `sdk install` like we previously did in the `.gitpod.yml`:

Then, when you create a new repository with these files, only on the first run, Gitpod builds an image:

![build-image](../../../../static/images/guides/custom-java-distribution-on-gitpod/build-image.png "external monitor setup build-image")

.. and once the workspace is ready:

```
$ java --version
Picked up JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS:  -Xmx3489m
openjdk 17.0.4.1 2022-08-12
OpenJDK Runtime Environment Temurin-17.0.4.1+1 (build 17.0.4.1+1)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM Temurin-17.0.4.1+1 (build 17.0.4.1+1, mixed mode, sharing)
```

> 

Reviewer: We have a [section](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/introduction/languages/java#setting-up-a-custom-dockerfile) in our docs describing this, can we hotlink it instead?

Reviewer: Could we also mention about the other workspace image variants we have?
- gitpod/workspace-java-11
- gitpod/workspace-java-17

> ## Use JDK unavailable in SDKMan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use a JDK that is unavailable in SDKman
```

What if the JDK we want to use is not available in SDKMan? Since we use Dockerfile, we can write shell scripts.

> As an example, lets use CRaC distrubution of the OpenJDK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As an example, lets use [Jetbrains distrubution of the OpenJDK](https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsRuntime).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following `.gitpod.Dockerfile` contents:

```

```

> FROM gitpod/workspace-full:2022-10-25-06-57-58
> 
> SHELL ["/bin/bash", "-c"]
> 
> RUN wget https://github.com/CRaC/openjdk-builds/releases/download/17-crac%2B3/openjdk-17-crac+3_linux-x64.tar.gz
> RUN sudo tar zxf openjdk-17-crac+3_linux-x64.tar.gz \
>     && sudo mv openjdk-17-crac+3_linux-x64 /opt/
> RUN echo 'export JAVA_HOME=/opt/openjdk-17-crac+3_linux-x64/' >> /home/gitpod/.bashrc \
>     && echo 'export PATH=/opt/openjdk-17-crac+3_linux-x64/bin:$PATH' >> /home/gitpod/.bashrc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
FROM gitpod/workspace-full:2022-10-25-06-57-58
SHELL ["/bin/bash", "-c"]
RUN wget https://cache-redirector.jetbrains.com/intellij-jbr/jbr-17.0.4.1-linux-x64-b653.1.tar.gz
RUN sudo tar zxf jbr-17.0.4.1-linux-x64-b653.1.tar.gz --directory /opt/
RUN echo 'export JAVA_HOME=/opt/jbr-17.0.4.1-linux-x64-b653.1/' >> /home/gitpod/.bashrc \
    && echo 'export PATH=/opt/jbr-17.0.4.1-linux-x64-b653.1/bin:$PATH' >> /home/gitpod/.bashrc
```

```

Let's break it down:

> 1. Download OpenJDK [CRaC](https://openjdk.org/projects/crac/) release from https://github.com/CRaC/openjdk-builds/releases/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Download Download Jetbrains Runtime release from https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsRuntime/releases/
```

> 2. Unpack it and move to /opt/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Unpack it and move to `/opt/`
```

Now, two important points:

> 3. Export JAVA_HOME effectively overwriting one set by SDKMan

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. `export JAVA_HOME` is effectively overwriting the one set by SDKMan
```

4. Add JDK bin directory to $PATH. It is important to put it before what's already been there so that the new JDK bin is before the SDKMan path.

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Finally, use `.gitpod.Dockerfile` from your `.gitpod.yml`:

```yaml
image:
  file: .gitpod.Dockerfile
```

And follow [see it in action!](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/introduction/learn-gitpod/gitpod-yaml#see-it-in-action)
````

Once you recreate the workspace, and the new image is built:

```

> $ java -version
> Picked up JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS:  -Xmx3489m
> openjdk version "17-crac" 2021-09-14
> OpenJDK Runtime Environment (build 17-crac+3-15)
> OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM (build 17-crac+3-15, mixed mode, sharing)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ java --version
Picked up JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS:  -Xmx3489m
openjdk 17.0.4.1 2022-08-12
OpenJDK Runtime Environment JBR-17.0.4.1+1-653.1-nomod (build 17.0.4.1+1-b653.1)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM JBR-17.0.4.1+1-653.1-nomod (build 17.0.4.1+1-b653.1, mixed mode)
```

---
author: maciej
date: Thursday, 27 Oct 2022 02:00:00 UTC
excerpt: Gitpod workspace image (the image on which your environment runs) comes with preinstalled Java development tools like SDKMan,and Gradle. There are at least two ways how you can to configure Java version for each new Gitpod workspace.
slug: custom-java-distribution-on-gitpod
teaserImage: teaser.jpg
image: header.jpg
title: How to use custom Java distribution on Gitpod
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

The default Gitpod [`workspace-full`](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/workspace-image) image comes with preinstalled Java development tools like [SDKMan](https://sdkman.io/), https://maven.apache.org/ and [Gradle](https://gradle.org/).

When you execute `java --version` in the terminal, you'll find out that the current Java version is Java 11 (at the time of writing this blog post).

Since [SDKMan](https://sdkman.io/) is installed, you can easily switch to a different Java version with:

> `$ sdk install java 17.0.4.1-tem`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```bash
$ sdk install java 17.0.4.1-tem
```\
```

_Remove `\` while committing this change_

```yaml
tasks:
  - before: sdk install java 17.0.4.1-tem
```

This is almost good. The problem is that `sdk install` prompts user to set the installed version as a default. There's no flag to run the command in non-interactive mode, but there is a [hacky workaround](https://github.com/sdkman/sdkman-cli/issues/101#issuecomment-155938383):

```yaml
tasks:
  - before: sdk install java 17.0.4.1-tem < /dev/null
```

The drawback is that this command takes some time to run and is executed every time the workspace is created.

Instead, we can create a custom workspace image that will be built only once.

## Set Java version with workspace image

Gitpod gives an option to use [custom Docker image](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/configure/workspaces/workspace-image) on which the workspace runs. Let's create one that uses Java 17 by default:

Remove the `before` task from `.gitpod.yml` and instead set the `image.file` property to `.gitpod.Dockerfile.`

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```yaml
```

image:
  file: .gitpod.Dockerfile
```

Next, create a file `.gitpod.Dockerfile`. If you are happy with the default Gitpod workspace image, you can use it as a base.

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```Dockerfile
```

FROM gitpod/workspace-full:2022-10-25-06-57-58

SHELL ["/bin/bash", "-c"]
RUN source "/home/gitpod/.sdkman/bin/sdkman-init.sh"  \
    && sdk install java 17.0.4.1-tem < /dev/null
```

Let's break it down:

1. It is recommended to use a specific Docker image tag for a base image. Go to https://hub.docker.com/r/gitpod/workspace-full and look for the latest tag, then use it in FROM command in the Dockerfile.
2. Change shell to bash, source SDKMan init so that `sdk` command becomes available, and run `sdk install` like we previously did in the `.gitpod.yml`:

Then, when you create a new repository with these files, only on the first run, Gitpod builds an image:

> ![build-image](../../../../static/images/guides/custom-java-distribution-on-gitpod/build-image.png "external monitor setup build-image")

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![build-image](../../../../static/images/guides/custom-java-distribution-on-gitpod/build-image.png)
```

.. and once the workspace is ready:

> ```

Reviewer 3: nit-fix suggestion:

```suggestion
```bash
```

> ```
> $ java --version
> Picked up JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS:  -Xmx3489m
> openjdk 17.0.4.1 2022-08-12
> OpenJDK Runtime Environment Temurin-17.0.4.1+1 (build 17.0.4.1+1)
> OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM Temurin-17.0.4.1+1 (build 17.0.4.1+1, mixed mode, sharing)
> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```bash
$ java --version
```\

**Example output**:

```bash
Picked up JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS:  -Xmx3489m
openjdk 17.0.4.1 2022-08-12
OpenJDK Runtime Environment Temurin-17.0.4.1+1 (build 17.0.4.1+1)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM Temurin-17.0.4.1+1 (build 17.0.4.1+1, mixed mode, sharing)
```\
```

_Remove \ while committing this change_

## Use a JDK that is unavailable in SDKman

What if the JDK we want to use is not available in SDKMan? Since we use Dockerfile, we can write shell scripts.

> As an example, lets use [Jetbrains distrubution of the OpenJDK](https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsRuntime).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As an example, let's use [JetBrains distribution of the OpenJDK](https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsRuntime).
```

Use the following `.gitpod.Dockerfile` contents:

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```Dockerfile
```

FROM gitpod/workspace-full:2022-10-25-06-57-58
SHELL ["/bin/bash", "-c"]
RUN wget https://cache-redirector.jetbrains.com/intellij-jbr/jbr-17.0.4.1-linux-x64-b653.1.tar.gz
RUN sudo tar zxf jbr-17.0.4.1-linux-x64-b653.1.tar.gz --directory /opt/
RUN echo 'export JAVA_HOME=/opt/jbr-17.0.4.1-linux-x64-b653.1/' >> /home/gitpod/.bashrc \
    && echo 'export PATH=/opt/jbr-17.0.4.1-linux-x64-b653.1/bin:$PATH' >> /home/gitpod/.bashrc
```

Let's break it down:

> 1. Download Download Jetbrains Runtime release from https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsRuntime/releases/

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Download JetBrains Runtime release from https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsRuntime/releases/
```

2. Unpack it and move to `/opt/`

Now, two important points:

3. `export JAVA_HOME` is effectively overwriting the one set by SDKMan

> 4. Add JDK bin directory to $PATH. It is important to put it before what's already been there so that the new JDK bin is before the SDKMan path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Add JDK bin directory to `$PATH`. It is important to put it before what's already been there so that the new JDK bin is before the SDKMan path.
```

Finally, use `.gitpod.Dockerfile` from your `.gitpod.yml`:

```yaml
image:
  file: .gitpod.Dockerfile
```

And follow [see it in action!](https://www.gitpod.io/docs/introduction/learn-gitpod/gitpod-yaml#see-it-in-action)

Once you recreate the workspace, and the new image is built:

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```bash
```

---
author: maciejwalkowiak

> date: Thursday, 27 Oct 2022 02:00:00 UTC

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: Wednesday, 09 Nov 2022 02:00:00 UTC
```
